# Likelihood-based Confidence Bound By Wu-Neale-2012

User the method proposed by Wu and Neale (2012) to find the lower or
upper bound of the likelihood-based confidence interval (LBCI) for one
parameter in a structural equation model fitted in
[`lavaan::lavaan()`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/lavaan.html).

## Usage

``` r
ci_bound_wn_i(
  i = NULL,
  npar = NULL,
  sem_out = NULL,
  f_constr = NULL,
  which = NULL,
  history = FALSE,
  perturbation_factor = 0.9,
  lb_var = -Inf,
  standardized = FALSE,
  wald_ci_start = !standardized,
  opts = list(),
  ciperc = 0.95,
  ci_limit_ratio_tol = 1.5,
  verbose = FALSE,
  sf = 1,
  sf2 = 0,
  p_tol = 5e-04,
  std_method = "internal",
  bounds = "none",
  xtol_rel_factor = 1,
  ftol_rel_factor = 1,
  lb_prop = 0.05,
  lb_se_k = 3,
  try_harder = 0,
  fit_lb = -Inf,
  fit_ub = +Inf,
  timeout = 300,
  ...
)
```

## Arguments

- i:

  The position of the target parameter as appeared in the parameter
  table of an lavaan object, generated by
  [`lavaan::parameterTable()`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/parTable.html).

- npar:

  The number of free parameters, including those constrained to be
  equal.

- sem_out:

  The fit object. Currently supports
  [lavaan::lavaan](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/lavaan-class.html)
  objects only.

- f_constr:

  The constraint function generated by
  [`set_constraint()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/set_constraint.md).

- which:

  Whether the lower bound or the upper bound is to be found. Must be
  `"lbound"` or `"ubound"`.

- history:

  Not used. Kept for backward compatibility.

- perturbation_factor:

  A number multiplied to the parameter estimates in `sem_out`. Using the
  parameter estimates as starting values may lead to errors in the first
  few iterations. Default is .90. This argument is ignored if
  `wald_ci_start` is \`TRUE.

- lb_var:

  The lower bound for free parameters that are variances. If equal to
  `-Inf`, the default, `lb_prop` and `lb_se_k` will be used to set the
  lower bounds for free variances. If it is a number, it will be used to
  set the lower bounds for all free variances.

- standardized:

  If `TRUE`, the LBCI is for the requested estimate in the standardized
  solution. Default is `FALSE`.

- wald_ci_start:

  If `TRUE`, there are no equality constraints in the model, and the
  target parameter is not a user-defined parameter, the Wald confidence
  bounds will be used as the starting value.

- opts:

  Options to be passed to
  [`nloptr::nloptr()`](https://astamm.github.io/nloptr/reference/nloptr.html),
  the current optimizer. Default is
  [`list()`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/list.html).

- ciperc:

  The intended coverage probability for the confidence interval. Default
  is .95, and the bound for a 95% confidence interval will be sought.

- ci_limit_ratio_tol:

  The tolerance for the ratio of `a` to `b`, where `a` is the distance
  between an LBCI limit and the point estimate, and the `b` is the
  distance between the original confidence limit (by default the Wald CI
  in [`lavaan::lavaan()`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/lavaan.html))
  and the point estimate. If the ratio is larger than this value or
  smaller than the reciprocal of this value, a warning is set in the
  status code. Default is 1.5.

- verbose:

  If `TRUE`, the function will store more diagnostic information in the
  attribute `diag`. Default is `FALSE`.

- sf:

  A scaling factor. Used for robust confidence bounds. Default is 1.
  Computed by an internal function called by
  [`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md)
  when `robust = "satorra.2000"`.

- sf2:

  A shift factor. Used for robust confidence bounds. Default is 0.
  Computed by an internal function called by
  [`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md)
  when `robust = "satorra.2000"`.

- p_tol:

  Tolerance for checking the achieved level of confidence. If the
  absolute difference between the achieved level and `ciperc` is greater
  than this amount, a warning is set in the status code and the bound is
  set to `NA`. Default is 5e-4.

- std_method:

  The method used to find the standardized solution. If equal to
  `"lavaan"`,
  [`lavaan::standardizedSolution()`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/standardizedSolution.html)
  will be used. If equal to `"internal"`, an internal function will be
  used. The `"lavaan"` method should work in all situations, but the
  `"internal"` method is usually much faster. Default is `"internal"`.

- bounds:

  Default is `""` and this function will set the lower bounds to
  `lb_var` for variances. Other valid values are those accepted by
  [`lavaan::lavaan()`](https://rdrr.io/pkg/lavaan/man/lavaan.html).
  Ignored for now.

- xtol_rel_factor:

  Multiply the default `xtol_rel` by a number, usually a positive number
  equal to or less than 1, to change the default termination criterion.
  Default is 1.

- ftol_rel_factor:

  Multiply the default `ftol_rel` by a number, usually a positive number
  equal to or less than 1, to change the default termination criterion.
  Default is 1.

- lb_prop:

  Used by an internal function to set the lower bound for free
  variances. Default is .05, setting the lower bound to .05 \* estimate.
  Used only if the lower bound set by `lb_se_k` is negative.

- lb_se_k:

  Used by an internal function to set the lower bound for free
  variances. Default is 3, the estimate minus 3 standard error. If
  negative, the lower bound is set using `lb_prop`.

- try_harder:

  If error occurred in the optimization, how many more times to try. In
  each new attempt, the starting values will be randomly jittered.
  Default is 0.

- fit_lb:

  The vector of lower bounds of parameters. Default is `-Inf`, setting
  the lower bounds to `-Inf` for all parameters except for free
  variances which are controlled by `lb_var`.

- fit_ub:

  The vector of upper bounds of parameters. Default is `+Inf`, setting
  the lower bounds to `+Inf` for all parameters.

- timeout:

  The approximate maximum time for the search, in second. Default is 300
  seconds (5 minutes).

- ...:

  Optional arguments. Not used.

## Value

A `cibound`-class object which is a list with three elements:

- `bound`: A single number. The value of the bound located. `NA` is the
  search failed for various reasons.

- `diag`: A list of diagnostic information.

- `call`: The original call.

A detailed and organized output can be printed by the default print
method
([`print.cibound()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/print.cibound.md)).

## Details

### Important Notice

This function is not supposed to be used directly by users in typical
scenarios. Its interface is user-*unfriendly* because it should be used
through
[`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md).
It is exported such that interested users can examine how a confidence
bound is found, or use it for experiments or simulations.

### Usage

This function is the lowest level function used by
[`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md).
[`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md)
calls this function once for each bound of each parameter. To use it,
[`set_constraint()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/set_constraint.md)
needs to be called first to create the equality constraint required by
the algorithm proposed by Wu and Neale (2012).

### Algorithm

This function implements the algorithm presented in Wu and Neale (2012;
see also Pek & Wu, 2015, Equation 12) that estimates all free parameters
in the optimization.

### Limitation(s)

This function does not yet implement the method by Wu and Neale (2012)
for an estimate close to an attainable bound.

## References

Pek, J., & Wu, H. (2015). Profile likelihood-based confidence intervals
and regions for structural equation models. *Psychometrika, 80*(4),
1123-1145.
[doi:10.1007/s11336-015-9461-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336-015-9461-1)

Wu, H., & Neale, M. C. (2012). Adjusted confidence intervals for a
bounded parameter. *Behavior Genetics, 42*(6), 886-898.
[doi:10.1007/s10519-012-9560-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10519-012-9560-z)

## See also

[`print.cibound()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/print.cibound.md),
[`semlbci()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/semlbci.md),
[`ci_i_one()`](https://sfcheung.github.io/semlbci/reference/ci_i_one.md)

## Examples

``` r
data(simple_med)
dat <- simple_med

mod <-
"
m ~ x
y ~ m
"

fit_med <- lavaan::sem(mod, simple_med, fixed.x = FALSE)

fn_constr0 <- set_constraint(fit_med)

out1l <- ci_bound_wn_i(i = 1,
                       npar = 5,
                       sem_out = fit_med,
                       f_constr = fn_constr0,
                       which = "lbound")
out1l
#> Target Parameter:       m ~ x (group = 1, block = 1)
#> Position:               1
#> Which Bound:            Lower Bound
#> Method:                 Wu-Neale-2012
#> Confidence Level:       0.95
#> Achieved Level:         0.950000000054991
#> Standardized:           No
#> Likelihood-Based Bound: 0.8277
#> Wald Bound:             0.83177
#> Point Estimate:         1.67613
#> Ratio to Wald Bound:    1.00482
#> 
#> -- Check --
#> Level achieved?         Yes (Difference: 5.4991e-11; Tolerance: 5e-04)
#> Solution admissible?    Yes
#> Direction valid?        Yes
#> 
#> -- Optimization Information --
#> Solver Status:          4
#> Convergence Message:    NLOPT_XTOL_REACHED: Optimization stopped because xtol_rel or xtol_abs (above) was reached.
#> Iterations:             3
#> Termination Conditions:
#>  xtol_rel: 1e-05
#>  ftol_rel: 1e-05
#>  maxeval:  500
#>  maxtime: 300
#> 
#> -- Parameter Estimates --
#>             m~x     y~m     m~~m     y~~y    x~~x
#> Start   0.83177 0.53508 35.37699 40.11896 0.93513
#> Final   0.82770 0.53508 35.37711 40.11896 0.93513
#> Change -0.00407 0.00000  0.00011  0.00000 0.00000
#> 
#> Bound before check:     0.8277
#> Status Code:            0
#> Call: ci_bound_wn_i(i = 1, npar = 5, sem_out = fit_med, f_constr = fn_constr0, 
#>     which = "lbound")
#> 
```
